2.1 Why Plan? (3:28)
Drucker's Effective Execute tells us what an action plan should look like:
An (action) Plan is:
.Statement of intentions≠Commitment
.Not a straitjacket
.Should be revised often
.Should anticipate to need to be flexible
.Needs a system for checking the results against expectatations

In addittion, a plan has to become the basis for executive time management,
it informs the way we plan, the evolutuin of our executives, and the time
that they spend, in the way they spend operating our business.
A project plan is very specific, and it's going to include the following
components.
A project plan is going to include identifying the ->|scope|<- (1:20), it
is going to include a phase of identifying all the ->|tasks|<-, the
->|dependencies|<- among them and the ->|schedule|<-.
In order to ultimately come up with an actual duration and time frame for
the completion of our project.
As part of our plan, we're also going to be thinking of our resources and
how many we need and when do we need them. We're going to be clarifying 
the trade offs that we're going to be making in terms of cost, resources
versus time.
And finally, we're going to develop a robust and a useful risk management
plan that will allow us to cope with changes in our future throughout the
life of the project.
One of the critical reasons why we plan projects is to help us bridge the
gap between the .-.>initiation<.-. phase and the .-.>execution<.-.
The plan allows us to reflect on the obhectives that we set and to realize
whether they're even feasible. It also allows us to come up with ideas
around how we plan to execute our project and what kind of mechanisms need
to be in place. The project management office, office, how it's going to
look like, where it's physically going to be located, what type of meeting
will occur, how often, and the plan gives us some indication as to what is 
needed and when. What are the pressure point of the project, milestones 
that have to be hit, and how we can plan accordingly.

In general, there is no prescribed rule to tell you how long you should
spend planning, but one of the most important, factors, is to realize that,
while you do plan, even if you've moved to the execution phase, and even
if you want to progress the project, you might have to go back and amend
your plan.
The plan is only there to start the process off. it is a work in progress
and it is a continuous improvement on our expectations.

Project Life-Cycle
Initiate->Plan->Execute->Close
.-.>Initiate<.-.:
.Establish Organization
.Project charter and definition
Plan:
.Identify ->|scope|<-
.Identify ->|tasks|<-, ->|dependencies|<- and ->|schedule|<-
.Plan resources
.Clarify trades-offs and decision making principles
.Develop a risk management plan
.-.>Execute<.-.:
.Monitor
.Communicate and report
.Correct and control
Close:
.Sign off
.Conduct a formal post-mortem

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.2 Detailed Scoping (6:02)
The 1st. step in planning a project is scoping the project properly.
This step is probably the most neglected step in the entire process
of planning a project. We rush too quickly to look at timing and 
Gantt charts.
In order to scope the project properly, we often use a tool, or we
recommend using a tool called the work breakdown structure. It's a 
visual tool that's literally going to break down the project into
working components.

Work Breakdown Structure
.Visually breaks down project scope
..Project
..Subprojects
..Work packages
..Activities / Tasks

Once we brainstorm, either in the form of a blackboard, sticky notes,
or on white board, then we can use certain tools and software in order
to organize these thoughts in a more acessible way (2:27)
The process of going through, the brainstorming process of going through
and identifying what is part of our project and what we might want to 
leave out of this specific project, is vital before we even start looking
at the schedule.

Work Breakdown Structure - Tips
.Use Sticky notes/blackboard/white board
Start with something that you can easily amend; either by pacing sticky notes
on the board, reorganizing them. Use a team of people to brainstorm, and work 
together with individuals, including those who are actually going to do, be 
doing the work; or your clients, who you might need to deliver the product to
in order to make sure that the scope is well defined.
.Use automated tools e.g. MS Project, WBSPro
.Detail down to no less than 5%-10% of the total duration or a single resource

Now if you can't get to the level of detail that is required, it implies that 
you might not be talking to the right people and you might need to find out 
more information about the scope of your project so the first step is coming up
with a work breakdown structure.
Now, we know the scope of a project.

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.3 Identifying Dependencies (5:48)

There are 3 ways to looko at the dependencies:

Work Breakdown Structure
-Start Project
--Creative
--Strategy
--IT
--Fundraising
--Marketing
--Sales
--Finance
--HR

1-The disign matrix typically has the list of activities in the column and
the list of the activities in the rows. (video 01:00)

2-The table (video 02:40)

3-Network Diagram (03:03)

Types of Dependencies
finish -> start
finish -> finish
start -> finish 
start -> start

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.4 Determine the Copletion Data and Critical Path (17:09)

For planning a project, we first scoped our project using a work 
breakdown structure.

Work Breakdown Structure
-Start Project
--Creative
--Strategy
--IT
--Fundraising
--Marketing
--Sales
--Finance
--HR

The next step in planning our project was to come up with the precedence
relationship; wich tasks are dependent on others an how are they depend?
We came up with the following list (00:33)

Estimatting Activity Durations can be Tricky! (02:05)
-Parkinson's Law
We plain for activity to take a certain amount of weeks, be sure that the 
work will fill up the entire duration

- Student's Syndrome
If I give you 4 weeks to complete a task, you are like to not even start
working on that task until the very last minute 

-Overconfidence
-Biases
  --Anchoring
  --Confirmation
  
(video 07:15)

Critical Path (14:14)
- The longest path in the project/network.
- The project duration, defined by the length of the critical path, is also
known as makespan.
- A delay in any activity along the critical path will cause a delay in the
project
- The method was developed by Engineers at DuPont Corporation in the 1950s.

Gantt Chart: Dependencies and Milestones (15:10)

ps.: Check out some videos prepared associated with how to execute on these
steps in MS Project.

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.5 How Do We Schedule? (03:04)

We've carried out a critical path analysis to come up with our project duration estimate
and to identify which of the activities in our network, in our project, are critical.
Those critical tasks have zero slack, they need to start as soon as we can and they
need to finish on time.
However, let's think about the noncritical tasks. When do we think that we would like
to perform the work? (00:35)

Depending on your project priorities and your project objectives, you might want to go
with one schedule versus the other, the other.
Let's think about the benefits of an as soon as possible schedule versus a late as 
possible schedule.

ASAP or ALAP?
------------------------------------|
As Soon as Possible |   Cost  | Time|
                          X       V
As Late as Possible |   Cost  | Time|
                          V       X
------------------------------------|
What is it that we care about?
Are we constrained by cost or by time?
We need to invest cost now in order to gain slack and bugger in terms of
our timing.
On the flip side, if we are constrained by costs, and we are working with
a limited budget and we know that maybe ca, time is something that we 
compromise on, we're better off pushing our tasks as late as possible.
As late as possible schedule delays the commitment of cost, delays the
commitment of resources untill a time that we know we must use it.
Costs futher down in the future are cheaper. However it eats, it eats
up all the slack. Postponing the tasks mean that we leave ourself with 
very little slack towards the end of our project and if we need extra
time, we will not have it. and so if our priority is cost, you're
better off scheduling as late as possible

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.6 What If I Don't Like Planning? Making Changes? (03:41)

Imagine that we're gone through all the steps: scoped the project and identified
all the different activites that need to take place. We've identified the precedence
relationships and we've estimated the task durations to find the overall project
expected completion time, and overall duration. 
But now, you realize that it's way too long. You don't have 12 weeks available to
you. You need to shorten your project. You need to meet a deadline. What can you do?
Well, luckily, the tools and the steps that we've taken so far will be critical and
will help us in identifying ways to shorten our project duration. And we're going
to start by those tasks that we identified as part of the critical path. The critical
path is the only way to focus our attention and to shorten our project duration. We 
start by identifying those tasks on the critical path that are candidate to shortening, 
or to crashing.
Project Crashing
.Project duration can be reduced only by shortening critical activities.
.It may be worth spending money to reduce the length of a project.
.  ->Select the least expensive to crash.
.New critical paths may emerge.
. ->reduce all critical paths!
We think about what do we need to spend in order to reduce their duration
Do we need to include additional resources?
Do we need to spend more money?
Once we've identified the least expensive task amoung the critical tasks that
we are going to be able to shorten, we start experimenting with shortening the
duration.
 But pay very carefull attention !  As you start shortening task duration, a new
 critical path, a new longest path in your project might emerge and therefore, 
 you might need to take your attention elsewhere and start crashing other 
 activities from other parallel paths. We need to conduct this crashing 
 activity or reducing the project duration in a cycle. We identify our critical
 tasks. We find the least expensive task to reduce its duration. We reduce its
 duration, and we identify the new critical path that might have emerged.
 All the critical paths, even if there are multiple of them, will need to be
 shortened in order for our overall project duration to be reduced.
 In the process of doung this, what's going to happen? Well, a few things.
 
 As a Result of Project Crashing
 .Critical path
 ..Shorter
 ..May change : We might introduce a new critical path and a new set of critical activities
 ..More activities may become critical
 .Higher risk?
 
But if we need to meet that external deadline, we might be willling to take upon
ourserlves that risk, reduce the slack in our project. Have more activities shortened
and tightened in their duration in order to meet the overall deliverable date.
If it's not possible to invest additional resources in order to reduce some of our 
ritical tasks, another alternative is to go back to our scope. Reflect on what is
ecessary, and look at our work breakdown structure. Can we eliminate some 
nnecessary tasks? Can we reduce the functionality of our product, and perhaps, 
postpone some functionatily to a later version or to a later phase?

Reducing Scope
.Eliminate activities
.Unncessary
 .Reduce functionality
 .Cut corners
 .Oursource
 
If we do that, and maybe we consider some areas where we can cut corners, or
perhaps, outsource some of the work. We might be able to reduce the project
completion time by looking at the scope, reducing the scope, and not 
necessarily accelerating our tasks. Depending on our trade offs among our 
objectives, if we're limited by this, if we're constrained by our scope, 
by our time or by cost, we can choose how to investigate reducing the overall
project duration.

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.7 Reflection on Common Mistakes (7:23)

video(00:40)

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Issue                     Consequences    Impact
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
No WBS                    Missing tasks   Incorrect scope
                                          No responsibility assigned
                                          Incorrect project duration,
                                          critical path, cost estimates,
                                          and resource loads
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Task durations specified  Underestimate   Underestimated project duration
in terms of work          task durations  Incorrect crucial path
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
No Network                Missing         Incorrect project duration
diagram                   dependencies    and critical path
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Many firms dig in to the plan, and they neglect to stop and come up with a
proper work breakdown structure.It is the most crucial step of the plan.
 No work breakdown structure will imply missing tasks, complete pieces of
 work that are neglected to be considered as part of your plan.
 It is all too simple to forget, or to neglect a component of your
 project and therefore conductiong a proper brainstorming, session, or
 working out your breakdown structure, will ensure that you do not find
 yourself without a proper scope. If you don't have a proper scope, then
 you won't have the proper project estimation, the duration estimate.
 You won't have a proper, network diagram or critical path, and your cost
 estimates will be way off, so spend the time working through the work
 breakdown structure.
 Other typical mistakes are the task durations are specified in terms of
 work and not in terms of actual durations. Neglecting to realize that 
 individuals have to go home for the weekend or they have to take some
 time off once in a while in order to come back the next day refreshed.
 And so, think about durations and not only work.
 No networw diagram.  The network diagram is a visual tool. It is appealing
 in the sense that it gives us an overview in a very visual way of the flow
 within our project. Make sure to spend some time. Look at your network 
 diagram and make sure that there is a logical flow of your chain from 
 start to finish. That will allow you to spot your critical path and your
 entire site of precedence.
 
 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Issue                     Consequences    Impact
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Tasks without             Missing         No project critical path
predecessors or           dependencies
successors
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fixed start dates         Missing         Plan prone to errors
to mimic                  dependencies    No project critical path
dependencies
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
No dependency                             Plan update cumbersome
between activities                        and prone to errors
in the correct
sequence
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dependencies              Unnecessary     Time wasted, unclear
between                   dependencies    network diagram
summary tasks
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Other common mistakes have to do a lot with the precedence relationships.
 These can often be pretty tricky to identify. And so, as we think through
 our plan and we work typically looking at a gantt chart, we might rush in
 and we might neglect to identify proper precedence relationships between 
 predecessors and successors. And so, don't use fixed date to mimic a
 relationship. Don't expect, that if a task, if you fix it to start at the
 first of August, it represents a link, or a flow from other tasks that are
 feeding into it. The first of August is arbitrary. If you postpone the 
 entire project, what you really want to be saying is that task b, depends
 upn task a. And so represent it with the proper dependency. If you happen
 to have tasks in your project that are scheduled in the right sequence
 but don't have the relationship, you might not realize in the future as
 things change, that they're actually linked by some information flow or
 from some even material flow from to the next.
 And finally, if you're working with a work breakdown structure with a 
 complicated project and you have summary tasks, don't link the summary
 tasks. Those tasks include the detailed individual level tasks, and the
 relationships shoud be formed only at that level.
 Following, or thinking about these commmon mistakes, and reflecting and
 ensuring that you don't exhibit them within your project plan, will allow
 you to put your best step forward, and have more confidence in your plan.
 
 Plan Checklist
.WBS
Available? Complete?
Communicated? Agreed-upon?
 
.Network Diagram
One start and one finish?
All activities with predecessors or successors?
 
.Milestones
One start milestone and one project competion milestone?
Intermediate milestone? Each one has a critical path?

.Gantt-chart
No missing dependencies between activities in correct sequence?
No summary task links?
Tasks with excessive durations?
Check dependencies(oberlaps, time lags)
Check critical path: from project start to finish?

Let's summarize and wrap up the key steps in planning projects:

Planning Wrap Up

.Project planning is crucial for project success:
spend the time plannning properly and not rushing to execution,
we will have a higher chance of success.

.A project plan is a guide, not a schedule of what will exactly happen

.Follow the project planning cycle:
Through word breakdown structure, and identifying the scope through a 
complete project schedule.

.Make sure the goal of the project is clear to you:

.Ensure project scope is complete(most crucial part of planning)

A few more point as we think abour wrapping up our planning phase:
Planning Wrap UP - Cont.

.Make sure that we estimate our individual activity durations:
We know that there are some challenges associated with estimating our
task durations, so spend some time reflecting on some of these
individual biases such as overconfidence and anchoring.

.Decide who owns each activity: 
And communicate with them. That they understand whether they're
critical or not and what tasks depend on them further down in 
the project, and who they depend on upstream.

.Know which are the critical activities("critical"≠"important"):
Identify your critical tasks in terms of your duration, not 
necessarily in terms of the importance of the scope.

.Prevent conflicts between activities:
And add dependencies if need be, to represent conflicts.

.Projects can be accelereated by crashing and/or fast-tracking:
Know that you have, in your back pocket, the tools to decide to
accelerate the project if need be, and to trade off your cost, 
time, and scope associated with your priorities of your project.

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.8 Project Managente in Action: Virginia Festival of the Book (4:22)
video(00:05)

The project, the festival typically takes somewhere around 10.5 to
11 months.
Determining the scope that the project involves, writing down each
and every task, and looking at what it's connected to either the
beginning or what it's connected to at the end is eye-opening. it
was really great for our administration and for our board to see
This is a huge project and it has hundreds if not thousands of 
taksks involved.
The thing that they learned the most from was the critical path
These are the elements that must be done in a timely fashion for
us to hit our mark. And with a project like the festival, we know 
it is going to happen on March 18, 2015.
We have a number of known milestones with the festival. We have the
date by which autors need to submit if they want to present. We
have the date by which we need to get to them to say, yes we'd
love to have you, or we're sorry, it won't work this year.
we have other dates like that all through our project and knowing
that those are important is one thing; bue when you look at the
critical path, you see the trickle down effect of what happens 
when you miss a deadline. The festival neededj to get those
decisions out in October as soon as we could. but, you know, 
sometimes things slip, and then we find that in December, that's
really having a horrible effect on our planning, because we haven't
been, we haven't put ourself in the best position.
We were a week late in getting our schedule published, and we were
still able to get our mailings out to our authors and do everything
we needed to do, but we gave one of our staff members 3 days to get
that done instead of the ten days that we'd actually allowed.
...
We learned with the project management. It sounds very simple but
that correlation between scope and time and budget and how they 
interrelate was such a great concept for us to hold onto.

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.9 Supplemental Tutorial: Getting Started with Microsoft Project (6:02)

(video 00:00)
task name, duration, start, finish, predecessors
Gantt chart
end = Diamond
critical path
Add a high level summary task, a roll up task that will tell me overall,
when do I start, when do I finish and my overall duration.
right-click on top, and insert a task, in this case : Startup Project
highlight all the other tasks underneath it, and click on indent them ->
This has automatically created a summary task that basically summarizes
the entire project. Our entire project is going to take 12 weeks. It
will start on Mon Jan 19th and it will complete on Fri, April 10th

We can also add a start milestone, if we would like to represent a 
point in time in which we all, of our projects or all of our tasks
are going to start. And so we, this is also a milestone, we can give
it a duration of 0, and we can make our first three tasks, meaning the
Creative, the Strategy and the IT, dependent on that start milestone.
Perhaps if we're depending on a specific approval or a specific license
in order to start, to get things started.
We have our complete Gantt chart with our starting date, our competion
date, and our critical tasks highlighted.
Another important view that we get from MS Project, or most project
management tools out therem is the network diagram.
By choosing the network diagram, let me collapse the boxes, so you
can see a better view of this. We get an entire overview, an entire
view of the network and the flow of the project from left to right
as we looked at before manually to make sure that we are comfortable
that our project is complete. There is a link between all of our tasks.
There are clear dependencies. We have one start and one finish, and we
can now be confident that our plan makes sense and that we're not
missing any fundamental relationships.

-- __ -- __ -- __ --

2.10 Supplemental Tutorial: Tracking Progress and Updating Project
Plan in Microsoft (09:25)

video(00:00)

Report on the status of a project
To report on any update on the tasks and the work that has been done.
And to report on how we're doing in terms of our spending, how much 
money have we spent so far and to allow us to compare to our original
plan. Are we behind schedule? Are we over budget? An when do we
anticipate to complete our project? The first step is to open up your
original plan.
Save the baseline.
Project ribbon and we set a baseline and press ok
I would also recommend that you resave the file to indicate when
you're reporting a status update.
Now we can go ahead and change the current date, the status date, and
start entering some information on how well we're doing in our project.
To update the dates, in terms of the status when we're reporting the
progress done,go to Project ribbon and chose the Project Information.
And simply change the date to the current date and the status date to
The Gantt chart will show a green line indicating what is the current
date that I'm reporting against. I can use this table to also report
how well we're doing, how much progress have we made on the tasks.
For instance, my start milestone. I've started the project already.
So I'm 100% complete with it. I can go to the task ribbon, set of the
blue buttons allow me to report a certain percentage complete of
work. in this case my Start milestone is a 100% complete. My creative
task is 25% complete. My strategy is 75% complete and my IT is 25% 
complete.
MS Project allow us to view this information in a Gantt chart here on
the right, with the blue bars indicating the progress made so far. 
I can also enter information associated with the cost, the actual 
cost, what I've spent so far.
Insert a column, I prefer to view everything in, in this table add
a column called Actual Cost. and I'm going to use this column to
report on the spending so far.
I've spent $500 on the creative, $300 on strategy, $1000 were
spent related to the IT task.
So far, we're entered information to representing what we've done in
terms of work and in terms of spending.
Another view that summarizes some of this information: go to the
view ribbon and under the view ribbon, you have a whole set of
predetermined tables that might be helpful for you as you look at
your progress. One of these tables that I recommend looking at is
your tracking table. The tracking table, allows us to view our
overall project, the start date of our tasks, the percentage that
we entered in terms of work completed. THe actual duration in 
terms of what we've done and what is remaining in terms of the
work to be done and the spending so far in terms of the costs
that we've entered into in Jana's project.
In some situations and in some environments, you might want to
work with the earned value analysis; earned value table and the
measures that we've introduced allow us to use the financial and
the costs of our tasks and what we anticipate spending to track
the progress in terms of our schedule and in terms of our cost.
Let's move to the earned value table and remind ourselves what
the information is and how it gets calculated.
So again, choosing from the View ribbon and the tables option, I
can actually choose More Tables and choose earned value table and
clicking Apply changes the table that I'm viewing, still with my
Gantt chart here on the right.
So what information do I have?
The 1st column that I see is the Planned Value. Given that two
weeks have passed from the project, what did I plan to do in 
terms of the work? How much of my original tasks should I have
been done with? reported in terms of the dollars spent.
My creative task had a total budget, or anticipated cost of
$1000.
If two weeks are gone out of the five weeks I allotted to this
task, I should've spent approximately 40% of my budget. Or I
should have been about 40% done in terms of the work, and so 
my Planned Value here is $400.
My earned Value is how much have I earned for the work I've completed?
I've done 25% of the task. If the task is expected to cost $1000, I've
earned $250 worth of work.
And my actual spent that I've entered into the system is $500. and so
what this tells me in the next two columns, the SV and the CV, the 
schedule variance and the cost variance, this tells me that I am
behind on both dimensions, meaning I am behind on the schedule $150 worth.
or I am , I completed 25%, as opposed to the 40% of the work that I should
have been done with, and my cost is about $250 above my original plan.
There's a lot of more information here as you tell from these extra
columns that we didn't spend time reviewing. If you would like more information
you can use the MS Project help file by (F1)
I will add two measures that we care about, or that we've discussed together, 
which are the performance indices for both the cost and the schedule.
To do this, I'm going to insert a new columnm and select from the list my
SPI, my schedule performance index, and I'm also going to add another column
which is my CPI, my cost performance index. And these numbers, as a reminder,
are benchmarked against onde, indicating that everything is on track. an under
one indicates that we are behind schedule or over budget and above one indicates
that we are ahead of schedule or under budget.
In this case, the 3 individual tasks that we have made progress on, seem to all be
slightly behind schedule and only the strategy task seems to actually be costing
us less than we antecipated The 2 other tasks are actually running slightly over
budget.
So how are we doing overall?
