Week 3 slides:
https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/projects101/lecture_slides/Week3Slides.pdf

3.1 What's Is Risk About Projects? (7:47)

So we've planned our project. We've come up with the correct scope,
we've come up with the dependencies amoung the tasks, calculated the
completion time of our project. So let's start implementing, Let's 
execute our project.
Part of our planning is going to pause after the initial first steps
and thing about what risks do we foresee in the exectuion of our project
and can we plan and amend our plans accordingly in order to better face
those risks as they manifest themselves?
Before we start thinking about the tools that we're goingo to use in 
order to incorporate risks and uncertainty into a project plan, let's
try and identify ehat is the source of the uncertainty and where the
risk's coming from as we think about projects and the execution of
projects.
Christoph Loch's Terminology at INSEAD, we're going to be thinking
about uncertainly on several dimensions (3)
video(01:21)
1-Foreseeable Uncertainties (Uncertainty)
-Variability
-Alternative Paths
2-Complexity  (Risks)
-Project Tasks
-Stakeholders
3-Unforseen Uncertainties (Ambiguity)
-Novel technology
-Novel markets

Map Demand and Technological Uncertainty by Industry (video 04:07)

Plan to Match Risk (05:14)
If you think about your project, you think about your industry and
you think about the activities that you're about to engage in,
mapping them on the two axis (Ambiguity, Complexity) will allow you
to identify the best way forward. And so, if your project has few
interactions, it is not highly complex. Tasks are either very
sequential or not many stakeholders involved at the same time with
your project. Than perhaps you can use a mmore straightforward
planning tools that we've introduced so far.
video(05:50)
When there is low variation in your project, low uncertaintly, and
few interaction, just straightforward planning will suffice.
As we introduce more interactions, more complexity, and there is a
high degree if risk introduced from the complexity that our project
entails, then we would like to add additional avenues to planning 
and executing our project.
We would like to encourage fast response, and allow our
decision-makers and those who execute in the field to take more
authority and react quicker to changes in their working environment.
If our anbiguity goes up, and we are dealing with still foreseeable
events, and we have few interactions, we can come up with a risk
management plan, that allows us to plan mitigation, contigencies,
and reactions to uncertainties as they unfold during the life cycle
of the project.
The more we move into the domain of highly complex and highly
ambiguous projects with unknown unknowns, or void a novelty that
we cannot articulate and plan for and scope out upfront. Then
we must include an opportunity for trial and error, for parallel
exploration, in order to be able to learn and to gain information
about the area of our expertise. and so the traditional project
planning tolls that we've been focused on so far are going to be
less useful in those environment and scoping will require a
different mindset and the execution that will follow will allow
for parallel experimentation and for mistakes to be made and for
information to be gained. As we move forward, and look , and
comceptualize how to plan our risk or how to plan for the risk
and uncertainties in our project, remember this mapping. and
remember to identify where your project falls in order to come up
with the best mitigation plan and the best set of execution rules
for your project.

--__--__--__

3.2 Identifying and Assessing Project Risks (09:52)

The 1st step in properly managing our risk is to come up with a risk management plan
This will allow us to identify the key drivers and the impact and come up with a 
mitigation or solution to dealing with those risks throughout the execution of
our project.
4 steps are included in coming up with a risk management plan. We're going to start
with identification, identifying the risks,  assessing them, planning our response
and them monitoring and controlling during the actual execution of the project.
(video 0:25)

Identification (00:40)
-Brainstorming, checklists, previous project, experts
-Risk Register
During the identification, we want to bring together all the different stakeholders
or representatives of those groups, individual with a lot of expertise that have done
similar projects or have been in different or inspiring industries before. They will 
help us together and come up with a very detailed and thorough list. and identifying 
all the different risks that could occur throughout the life of our project.
We can look at the historical data, databases to come up with actual statistics
associated with those risks. or we can consult with experts and learn from their 
experiencies. read post mortem reports, and come up with a risk register, or a list
of possible risks that could occur to our project. These could be risks associated
with the scope, duration or associated with the cost of our project.

Assessment
-Impact
-Likelihood
-Prioritized Risk Register
Well. how likely are they occur, and what is the impact if they do occur?
Is it goingo to end up being minor and not affect our project? Or will it
catastrophic, not only for our project, but perhaps to our entire company?
The combination of Impact and the Likelihood of a risk to occur gives us
some sense of priority.

Response Planning
-Identify response strategy to each risk
-Assign responsibilities

Once we've identified the set of risks that we need to think about, how likely
they are to occur, what is the impact if they do occur, and we've prioritized
them, then we can start planning a response.
We can identify how we would like to deal with each one of those risks in our
Risk Register. and perhaps most importantly, we can identify and assign a
responsible individual in our firm that will monitor that source of risk and
that will raise the red flag and allow us to get plenty of alert and plenty
of warning in advance of a risk occurring. That responsibility, that owner of
a risk, will insure that our project execution is impacted to the minimal degree,
from the reality, as it unfolds.

Monitoring and Control
-Update risk probabilities
-Execute planned strategy if events occur
Once we move into the execution of the project and we monitor and control our
different tasks, then we think carefully about updating our risk plan.
The Risk Register is a living document, as we progress through the project, we learn
more about the nature of the work, we learn more about the world around us, we can
update the probabilities and the impact that different risks impose on our project
plan or our project itself. And therefore, as the project progresses, we might change
the priorities in our Risk Register and we might focus on the different set of risks 
later on in the project than we thought up front.

Hopefully, if everything is in place, we have the set of tools and we have the
strategies and we have the capability to deal with the risk as it unfolds or as it
occurs in reality.
Let's focus a little bit on the assessment component.
How do we think about the impact and the likelihood? And how do those come together
to form a priority and to establish our strategy, in case of dealing with each one
of our risks? One accessible way that many folks like to think about the assessment
component, is to think about a matrix. 
(video 03:53)
Map the risks identified on this metric (video 04:24)
How lilely are they to occur, and what is the impact if they do?
(video 04:25)
As we map our different risks and our different events onto this matrix, it will
give us an idication on how we might want to plan the strategy to deal with
those risks.
If we're faced with that kind of risk which is extreme in nature, we may wnat a 
mitigation plan. We may want to find a way to avoid it completely and remove that
event or that risk on the horizon from even occurring, and so, we might develop a 
backup system in case things go awry. We might consult with other firms to develop
parallel attempts at comming up with a new baggage system, all in order to make sure
that we've mitigated away that risk from occuring. Contigency pans might be helpfull
in some cases. Mitigation plans could be helpful in other instances. We might also 
want to think about redundancy, meaning having 2 parallel paths to ensure that if one
goes wrong, we have a backup in place, We could also think about hedging, if the risks
are financial in nature and have cost implication, we can look at the financial markets
and come up with a hedge plan. to ensure that we don't find ourselves vulnerable on
the cost frontier.
Many consulting firms, like McKinsey, like to think about it, like to take these 2 
dimensions of likehood and impact, and push it a step further in order to come up with
the priority score. In order to come up with a score of the risk that allows us to
prioritize our risk in our risk register.
(video 07:53)
Probability Impact Matrix
Risk Score = Probability x Impact
(07:53)
In order to do that, we need to take our impact factor, which we've previously talked
about from insignificant to catastrophic, quantify it, assign a certain number, and then
we can multiply together the probability of occurrence with the impact that it will entail.
These numbers naturally give us come kind of ordering among the different risks, and therefore
we use the risk score to come up with the priority, prioritize our risks. Which are the
most extreme, that require attention immediately? and which can we have at the botton of our
list with the proper contingency in place, but they're not requiring ongoing attentions right now.

We've gained a lot of information, we've identified our risks, we've conceptualized the
likelihood that they will occur, the impact that they will have if they do occur, we've come
up with a risk score, and we put it all together in the Risk Register. 
(video 08:49)
This is a living document.
This is a document that allows us to monitor the progress and to make sure that we're all aware
of the sources of risk that we might face and what is the strategy that we have put in place
in case they occur?
Most importantly, we identify an owner, an individual that is responsible for tracking how things
are going, that will alert us if things have gone wrong. And that will raise the red flag or call
for the additional resourcers when the time comes in order to deal with one of these risks that
emerge.
(video 09:21)
In reality, these risk registers might be very big and have many different tasks associated with them.
They might require a lot of attention, but they are vital part of our planning process and they are
crucial for the success of our project because they allow us to walk into the project, and
start executing the tasks immediately, knowing that we have a plan to follow in case things go bad.

--__--__--__

3.3 A More Realistic Timeline Part 1 (06:59)

So we know how to develop a risk management plan. We can identify the main risks that our
project might face, and prioritize them, assign an owner, and we're ready to get going.
What we're going to do now is we're going to dig in to a specific source of uncertainty and
we're going to think about the risk and the variability that we may face in our schedule. We
know that there's goingo to be variability to the duration of our project. How can we be more
specific and learn more about it in order to plan porperly?
In order to do this, let's look at the example that we're seen along the way. Let's revisit our
start up project example.
(00:45)
Work Breakdown Structure
Start Project
-Creative -Strategy -IT -Fundraising -Marketing -Sales -Finance -HR
We've come up with our work breakdown structure and we've identified the 8 tasks that are part of
our project.
More than that we've come up with some initial estimations. We know wich tasks proceed which and we
know an initial estimate for the duration. How long will each one of our tasks take? What is our best
guess or our estimate for their duration?
When we did this we were able to identify using our network diagram and our entire critical path analysis,
we identified the overall expected project duration. What is the most likely time that we think our project
will be completed by.
We thought that it would, it was going to be 12 weeks. But what happens if my creative task, which is critical,
takes longer? Say for instance seven weeks? What if it finishes sooner, in 3 weeks? What is the actual impact to
my overall project duration?
And more than just the creative task, what about variability in the order tasks that I have in my project? Each one
might not be exactly my, my best guess, or my likely scenario. It could be that if could go sooner, or it might take
longer.
What impact does it have on the overall project duration?

video(02:25)

Schedule Risk Analysis (video 02:25)
 
What is the swing on our project duration?
The best way to view it, the best way to gain insight as to that impact, is to look at what is called a tornado
diagram, or a tornado chart   (video 03:31)
|The tornado diagram is a visual representation of the variability in the overall project duration When I change
each one of my tasks from its minimum to its maximum duration. Let me walk through and explain it with the
example the finance tasks which appears on the top ( video 03:49)
The finance task show the swing (oscilation) with the blue side going down from my line in the middle which is on 12, 
it goes all the way down to 11. This is a project duration of 11 and it goes all the way up, in red, the most
pessimistic or the worst case scenario, all the way up to 17. This implies that when my finance task swings from
its earliest completion time. To its maximum completion time the impact on my project duration is, that it can vary
from 11 weeks to 17 weeks. There is a variability of 6 weeks that is caused by the variability in the finance task itself. 
The chart is called tornado because typically it is ordered from largest all the way down to the smallest and that gives
us an idication as to the big ring versus the smallest ring.
As we can see, the HR and the IT tasks do not have an impact on the overall product duration. And so if we're trying to
focus our attention on which tasks give us the most source of uncertainty, in terms of our overall project duration, we
can focus our attention at the top of the chart, or those tasks that are closer to the top, as supposed to those closer
to the bottom.
So, it identifies and prioritizes some of these tasks for us in the context of maning our project duration and getting a
better sense and feeling more comfortable with any deadline that we set our project.
So the 1st step associated with conducting a risk analysis and in-depth risk analysis for our project schedule is to
first ask and collect 3 estimates for each duration of each task. Ask for the minimum duration, the maximum duration
and try identify the most likely.
Sometimes it's useful to look at historical data to come up with that information. How quickly were tasks completed
in the past when we're done something similar? Or what was the maximum it ever took us to get some sense of the 
maximum possible duration? You could ask multiple individuals who have experience in that area, how long did it take
you in the past?
What was the quickest you were able to achieve a certain task? or how, what was the worst that ever happened to you? Or
we could ask individuals from different departments, with different expertise, to give us different perspectives and
put that information together and combine it to come up with 3 points or 3 numbers to estimate a range. And over all we
want to start thinking about our project completion as a range and not as a specific point. We know that our project is
not likely to complete exactly in the 12 weeks that we identified up front.
We know thre's going to be a swing, It's going to be anywhere from maybe 11 to 17 weeks. And so we start using those terms
in order to describe our project and not guarantee a completion by, for instance, 12 weeks.

Schedule Scenarios
.Elict ranges or 3 point duration estimates
.Consider historical data
.Ask multiple opinions
.Start thinking of the overall project duration as a range not a single number.

--__--__--__

3.4 A More Realistic Timeline Part 2 (8:23)

When we looked at the variability and tasks durations, we considered how much taks's variability affects the
overall project duration when holding the others fixed, or constant at their most likely duration. But in reality,
everything is going to be uncertain, and task's durations are going to move all over the place and we're not going
to have one source of variability with everything else staying constant.
Our next step is to move beyond changing each task separately, but we're going to throw all of our variability and
we're going to use very cool tools to visualize and to conceptualize what the overall impact is going to be on our
project duration. When we acoount for the interactions and the dependencies and the inter, and the links and
different sources of variabilities that we have in our project. So let's go back and see how we can do this, given
the same information that we've elicited on our specific example of our start up project. We're going to walk through
the example and see what we might, what steps we might take in order to come up with a complete probability distributions
for our overall project duration.

So we have a list of tasks (video 01:15)
We have our 8 tasks and we have our 3 points, or our 3 data points of each task's estimate a duration. We have the 
minimum duration it could be, the maximu duration it could be, and some estimate of the most likely duration as well.
Now we're going to allow our tasks to not only obtain their extreme durations, for instance, 3 or 7 weeks for our Creative.
But we're going to allow for Creative to move anywhere between 3 and 7 and we're also going to articulate something around
how likely we believe it is that Creative will take a certain length of time.
We're going to do this for all our tasks and assign a probability distribution for each one of our task durations.
Allowing them all to vary simultaneously and preserving our precedence relationship will tell us something about the
distribution of the overall project duration. The 1st step to do this is to replace our estimates here with an entire
probability distribution.
video(02:15)
There are specialized tools out there, Crystal Ball or @RISK or many other alternatives.
video(02:33)
Using these specialized tools, I can replace my minimum, my maximum durations with an estimated duration that is coming
from an entire distribution. In this case, I use something fairly simple and intuitive which is called the triangular
distribution. In order to use a triangular distribution, I need to assign a minimum and a maximum, which I know. I've 
obtained that information. I've collected that information for this specific task and each one of the values in this
range can be realized. It is a possible outcome that I might see. But Iam telling my tool that it is more likely to be
 centered. It is more likely in this case to be somewhere around five. So there's a higher probability to obtain values
 somewhere in the middle. I could assign this distribution, a fairly intuitive and straightforward distribution, to each
 one of my tasks separately. And when I press a button, I will see a different possible outcome for my future project.
 Doing this 10,000, 100,000, even a million time, will simulate a million possible realities that my project might face,
 a million instances of my future project. And if I look at the patterns that emerge, I will be able to conclude what my
 average, or my expected duration would be. I might be able to learn something about the likelihood of different values.
 Once I throw it all in, into my tool, and I assign a distribution for each one of my tasks, I run it a million times
 with a million potential futures.I see the following chart. I see a cumulative distribution. (video 04:20)
 What this tells me, it tells me the likellihood that the overall project duration will be a certain number of weeks.
 You may not be able to see all the numbers, but I will highlight them and talk about them so you can learn from this
 chart, even visually. What I see herem for instance, is that the 12 weeks, which we initially calculated using our
 critical path analysis. Well, I see that there is somewhere around, say 25% that the project will be completed up to
 12 weeks. There is closer to 75% chance that it will take us longer. (video 04:56). Somewhere around 16 weeks, for
 instance, if I go all the way up. I estimate somewhere around 95% chance of completing this project within 16 weeks.
 And so, if I'm looking to set a completion date or to report how long it might take me to complete a project, I can
 choose a confidence level. I can say Iam 95% certain that I will complete within approximately 16 weeks. And I can be
 more accurate, given the information that I have and given the variability that I know that exists in my project.
 Another way to view it is looking at the frequency, or looking at the probability. (video 05:34) What is the chance
 that I will find myself within a certain range? Or what is the chance that my project duration, my project will be 
 completed within a certain number of weeks?
 (video 05:45) I can use the tool to come up with confidence ranges, In this case, Iam 90% certain to finish between
 10.5 to somewhere in the region of just over 16 weeks. I can convey my confidence level. Iam 90% confidence that this
 is the range within which my project will be completed.
 And so we started with individual tasks. We started with calculating the most likely out, estimated duration, and we
 then looked at ranges. Next step was to vary each task at a time and to think about what is its impact on the overall
 project duration. Thenm we allowed them all to vary simultaneously and we created these wonderful charts that tell us
 something about the probability and the confidence that we have in completing the project within a certain length.
 
 Changing Critical Path
 .As task duration changes, critical path might change.
 .We will no longer ask - wich tasks are on the critical path?
 
 What we also have to remind ourselves is that as we start and begin on a project, and we acknowledge the fact that the,
 and variability will occur and tasks, some of them will take shorter and some of them will take longer than our
 estimations. We are going to see, or we could find ourselves on a different critical path. We're no longer going to be
 talking about a specific single critical path. And so, we're no longer going to be asking which are the tasks that are on
 the critical path, because the critical path might vary in realitym and might vary as we move and progress through the project.
 And so now that we have a tool that allows us to model the variability in each task, we can also ask the question, what is
 the chance, or how likely is it, that each one of our tasks is on the critical path? No longer certainty but a degree of 
 likellihood, or some probabilistic statement. When we do thos and we simulate it, we can see for instance, and we can obtain
 the following information (video 07:36)
 Critical Index
 .Probability that an activity is critical
 We see here that the Creative task is 93% certain, or we're 93% chance that it will be on the critical path. There is
 about 70% chance that the Sales activity will be on the critical path, and there is virtually no chance that the IT will
 form part of our critical path. And so again we can use our critical index, or the likely that our task is on the critical
 path, in order to prioritize our attention and to tell us where to focus and which task and wich ressources might
 require our attention to make sure that we complete our project within the range that we anticipate to complete it on.
 
 --__--__--__
 
3.5 Cost Risk Analysis (3:01)

In a similar way to the fact that we thought about the schedule variability and the uncertainty that exists in our project
completion time, there is also a certain, uncertainty related to the cost of our project. Risks and variability that we can
think about, and plan for, associated with how much each task will cost us, and what is the overall cost of our project.

Budget Risks
.Cost estimates are subject to variations.
.Foreseeable risks can cause the actual project cost to differ from planned.
.Establish some contingency budget.
.Budget contingency should be allocated at a project not task level (provides more flexibility for the project manager).

Our cost suffer from the same type of variation. It could be external effects, such as weather or regulation that
might imply that we will have to pay more to execute and to complete some of our tasks. We might need extra resources. And
therefore, we can think about the variability that exists and we can start conceptualizing what kind of contingencies we
would like in place. How are going to ensure that we do not exceded our budget? And how do we plan accordingly to cope with
any ucertainty that we find ourselves facing.
Before we see a vision of what it might look like to run a similar analysis, a simulation analysis, to think about the, the
uncertainty that exists in our project budget, just a word of caution or some thought has to be paid to where we put the
contingencies. Do not put the contingencies on each and every task even though the tasks themselves could be variable in
terms of the duration. Allow the project manager to control that contingency associated with the budget to give the project
manager maximum control on where to spend the extra funds and when and the project manager has that knowledge, and the
project manager can balance the objectives and the priorities associated with the project objectives in order to best utilize
the contingency budget.
And so taking similar steps to the ones we took with the schedule, we can come up with a probabilistic forecast for how much
the project would cost us. What is the budget that we need, and how comfortable or confident are we that we will actually
meet that budget.
(video 01:58)
Simulation Results
We can look at an entire distribution. What is the likelihood our project costing so much? We can talk about ranges.
We're talking about a budget for a project that can vary between 346,000 to somewhere just under 354,000. This is our 90%
confidence range. We are 90% confident that our project budget will be somewhere within that range. And therefore, we can 
choose our overall project budget, and allow for extra contingency. Perhaps, we set it somewhere in the region of $350,000
and we give ourselves 10 t0 15% contingencies to make sure that we are highly confident that we are going to meet this
project budget, and not exceed it.
Perhaps, we will come in under budget, but we know that we have the available resources if we need them.

--__--__--__

3.6 Planning for Ambiguity (4:28)

We've seen how we can take into account uncertainty and variability that we expect in our project duration and our project
cost. We've looked at a project plan (video 00:09) and we've identified how variability in the individual task completion
times might affect our overall project duration. But what if we don't have that information? What if we can't estimate the
durations at all, let alone 3 estimates for the durations. And what if we can't even estimate which tasks to include in 
our project? (video 00:29) What will it take to produce a product? What will the product look like? 
If we are in the sphere of highly ambiguous projects, an environment with many unknown unknowns to us, new technology, new
customers, new market and new opportunities, we may not be able to come up with a plan, let alone conduct some sort of risk
analysis that we've done so far. So what do we do? Well. luckily there are tools and there are concepts that we can introduce,
and we will be discussing, that allow us to deal and to think about how to work in highly ambiguous project settings.
Instead of limiting ourselves to a specific plan, and thinking about the steps in a very specific manner, we're going to
open the door to conceptualizing a whole roadmap of opportunities, a whole slew of possible outcomes that we might find
ourselves and our product might accomplish at the end of the day. And instead of limiting ourselves to very specific tasks
and duration, we're going to allow our individual employess, the developers, the engineers to conduct the work themselves
and to find out more information that will help us adjust our plans for the project. We will progress in short and smaller
durations on a near term basis. (video 01:52) We will make little commitment as to how the future might unfold and we will be
comfortable with the idea that we might find ourselves in many different final scenarios down the road a year and a half out.
In the meantime we will empower individual teams to do short iterations, trial and error, to make decisions for themselves
and to come back to us and report successes and opportunities that failed, in order for  us to shut some doors and open the
new ones. This mindset moves away from the rigid work with the critical path. However, the critical path is important, and
higherlevel senior management might still like to look at it and plan accordingly a company vision and a company strategy.
and so (video 02:43) there needs to be a communication between the teams on the field that are doing short iterations and
quick information gain on each sub-level task, to communicate back to the higher level management what they've learned and
how this fits with the vision of the progress of the project for the whole organization. Working in highly ambiguous settings
is important to recognize how much, how important it is to gain information, to have our developers and to have those 
enginners out there working and progressing and gaining knowledge all the time.
(video 03:15)
Plan to Match Risk
As we bring the material to a close and we think about the last few sesseions that we've had, we identified ways in which we
planned for risks, on which we take into account risks in our project planning and how that might inform how we execute our
projects as well. We identify as a firm , where we are, how can we characterize our project, and how can we characterize the
firm and the industry that we operate in. We identify the degree of complexity and how ambiguous (video 03:42) the setting is,
and then we choose how to plan and how to execute our project. And in the course of planning our project and before we dive
into the execution, we spend some time thinking about our risk, coming up with a management plan, conducting a simulation
analysis, or allowing our teams to explore, and setting ourselves up to a situation where we are going to conduct multiple
parallel trial and arrow, errors exploration opportunities.
Putting these ideas together with a solid plan and a solid risk management approach, we're now set up to start executing
projects.

--__--__--

3.7 Project Management in Action: Lumi Juice (3:11)



